docs: add vulnerability report verifier (#35)
deislabs/ratify-web: docs/external plugins/Verifier/vulnerabilityreport.md

# Vulnerability Report

> This document outlines how Ratify can be used to verifier vulernability reports. The `vulnerabilityreport` verifier is added as a plugin to the ratify verification framework. Currently the vulnerability report verifier supports the following report types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document outlines how Ratify can be used to verify vulernability reports. The `vulnerabilityreport` verifier is added as a plugin to the Ratify verification framework. Currently the vulnerability report verifier supports the following report types:
```

### CLI

Sample JSON
```json
{
    "store": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugins": [
            {
                "name": "oras",
            }
        ]
    },
    "policy": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugin": {
            "name": "configPolicy"
        }
    },
    "verifier": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugins": [
            {
                "name": "vulnerabilityreport",
                "artifactTypes": "application/sarif+json",
                "maximumAge": "24h",
                "disallowedSeverity": ["high", "critical"],
                "denylistCVEs": ["CVE-2021-44228"]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

## Advanced Scenario

Alice has a Kubernetes cluster. She wants to enable vulnerability report verification. In particular, she wants to make sure all container images used in K8s resources have at least one valid vulnerability report attached to the image. The report must:
- be in SARIF format
- generated from Trivy or Grype
- created less than 24 hours ago
- has no HIGH or CRITICAL severity level vulnerabilities in the report
- does not contain the log4shell CVE 

> Furthermore, each vulnerability report must have a valid notation signature attached to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, each vulnerability report must have a valid Notary Project signature attached to it.
```

See https://notaryproject.dev/docs/faq/#notary-project-terms

First, follow only steps 1 and 2 of the [manual quickstart](../../quickstarts/quickstart-manual.md). 

Next, install the vulnerability report constraint template and constraint:

```shell

> kubectl apply -f https://deislabs.github.io/ratify/library/vulnerability-report-validation/template.yaml

Reviewer: Are these two file links valid? I can't access them and responded 404

Author: They currently don't exist. We'll need to wait for the main PR in the ratify repo to merge first.

> kubectl apply -f https://deislabs.github.io/ratify/library/vulnerability-report-validation/samples/constraint.yaml

Reviewer: For advanced scenario, do you want to elaborate more on how users apply the flexible constraint policies based on the given condition " all container images used in K8s resources have at least one valid vulnerability report attached to the image."?

Author: Added a bit more context on the exact policy constraint template defines

```

An image `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2` is scanned and a vulnerability report is generated. A reference artifact is generated:
1. Use Trivy to scan `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2` and output a report in SARIF format
    ```shell
    trivy image -q -f sarif myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 > trivy-sarif.json
    ```
2. A tool such as `oras` is used to package, attach, and then push the report to registry
    - `artifact-type` MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - file media type (layer) MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - `org.opencontainers.image.created` annotation with RFC3339 formatted current timestamp
    ```shell
    oras attach \
        --artifact-type application/sarif+json \
        --annotation "org.opencontainers.image.created=$(date -u +'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ')" \
        myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 \
        trivy-sarif.json:application/sarif+json
    ```
3. Use `notation` to sign the report
```shell
report_digest=$(oras discover myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 -o json | jq .manifests[0].digest | tr -d \")
notation sign myregistry.io/vuln/alpine@$report_digest
```

> The resulting image will have a single SARIF vulnerability report artifact attached with a notation signature attached to the report:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting image will have a single SARIF vulnerability report artifact attached with a Notary Project signature attached to the report:
```
ditto

        └── application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
            └── sha256:1f89580da5b08d943ed0a403f1629928a21aec3f51bce7c38b0bea8b187b83a7
```

Next, we configure Ratify with a `vulnerabilityreport` verifier Custom Resource:
```yaml
apiVersion: config.ratify.deislabs.io/v1beta1
kind: Verifier
metadata:
  name: verifier-vulnerabilityreport
spec:
  name: vulnerabilityreport
  artifactTypes: application/sarif+json
  parameters:
    nestedReferences: application/vnd.cncf.notary.signature
    maximumAge: 24h
    disallowedSeverity:
      - high
      - critical
    denylistCVEs:
      - CVE-2021-44228 # Log4Shell
```

Finally we will attempt to deploy our test image `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2`. We expect this to FAIL since our vulnerability report indicates multiple HIGH and CRITICAL level severities:

```shell
> kubectl run vuln-alpine-image -n default --image=myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2
Error from server (Forbidden): admission webhook "validation.gatekeeper.sh" denied the request: [vulnerability-report-validation-constraint] Subject failed verification: myregistry.io/vuln/alpine@sha256:25fad2a32ad1f6f510e528448ae1ec69a28ef81916a004d3629874104f8a7f70
```

> Taking a look at the Ratify logs reveals the failing report. Note how the report includes a successful notation signature verification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking a look at the Ratify logs reveals the failing report. Note how the report includes a successful Notary Project signature verification. 
```

This document outlines how Ratify can be used to verify vulernability reports. The `vulnerabilityreport` verifier is added as a plugin to the Ratify verification framework. Currently the vulnerability report verifier supports the following report types:

- Reports attached to the subject image as a referrer artifact
- Reports in SARIF format
- Reports generated by [Trivy](https://aquasecurity.github.io/trivy/v0.47/) or [Grype](https://github.com/anchore/grype)

## Table of Contents

* [Example Scenario](#example-scenario)
* [Configuration](#configuration)
* [Advanced](#advanced-scenario)

## Example Scenario 

Alice has a Kubernetes cluster. She installs Ratify with Gatekeeper on her cluster using the [Ratify quickstart guide](../../quick-start.mdx). She now wants to enable vulnerability report verification. In particular, she wants to make sure all container images used in K8s resources have at least one valid vulnerability report attached to the image. The report must:
- be in SARIF format
- generated from Trivy or Grype
- created less than 24 hours ago
- has no HIGH or CRITICAL severity level vulnerabilities in the report
- does not contain the log4shell CVE 

### Recording

> [![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/622368.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/622368)

Reviewer: There is a way to embed the player into the website page. Could you try it as follows?

``` 
<script async id="asciicast-622368" src="https://asciinema.org/a/622368.js"></script>
```

Author: Seems like this is nontrivial. I tried to change the file to mdx but I still cannot embed the script inside the file.

1. Use Trivy to scan `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2` and output a report in SARIF format
    ```shell
    trivy image -q -f sarif myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 > trivy-sarif.json
    ```
2. A tool such as `oras` is used to package, attach, and then push the report to registry
    - `artifact-type` MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - file media type (layer) MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - `org.opencontainers.image.created` annotation with RFC3339 formatted current timestamp
    ```shell
    oras attach \
        --artifact-type application/sarif+json \
        --annotation "org.opencontainers.image.created=$(date -u +'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ')" \
        myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 \
        trivy-sarif.json:application/sarif+json
    ```

The resulting image will have a single SARIF vulnerability report artifact attached:

```shell
> oras discover myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 -o tree
myregistry.io/vuln/alpine@sha256:25fad2a32ad1f6f510e528448ae1ec69a28ef81916a004d3629874104f8a7f70
└── application/sarif+json
    └── sha256:6170ef41e5a7c7088f86e3bc6b9c370cf97e613f7c7e359628c0119ec7d3d5f4
```

> Next, we configure Ratify with a `vulnerabilityreport` verifier Custom Resource:

Reviewer 2: should we include a apply command for customer to copy

              ]
            },
            "shortDescription": {
              "text": "stack overflow vulnerability in ash.c leads to arbitrary code execution"
            }
          },
          ...
        ]
      }
    }
  ]
}

```
## Configuration

### Kubernetes

Sample YAML
```json
apiVersion: config.ratify.deislabs.io/v1beta1
kind: Verifier
metadata:
  name: verifier-vulnerabilityreport
spec:
  name: vulnerabilityreport
  artifactTypes: application/sarif+json
  parameters:
    maximumAge: 24h
    disallowedSeverity:
      - high
      - critical
    denylistCVEs:
      - CVE-2021-44228 # Log4Shell
```

| Name               | Required | Path                               | Description                                                                                            | Default Value |
| ------------------ | -------- | ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------- |
| maximumAge         | No       | spec.parameters.maximumAge         | The string formatted max age of report                                                                 | ""            |

> | disallowedSeverity | No       | spec.parameters.disallowedSeverity | String array of disallowed severities. Verification fails if ANY specified severity found              | []            |

Reviewer 2: is link for allowed values for disallowedSeverity?

> | denylistCVEs       | No       | spec.parameters.denylistCVEs       | String array of CVE IDs. Verification fails if ANY specified CVE ID found                              | []            |

Reviewer 2: Wondering is there a valid CVE list that we can link to?

| passthrough        | No       | spec.parameters.passthrough        | Bypasses all verification except for `maximumAge`. Report content in `report` field of verifier report | false |

### CLI

Sample JSON
```json
{
    "store": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugins": [
            {
                "name": "oras",
            }
        ]
    },
    "policy": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugin": {
            "name": "configPolicy"
        }
    },
    "verifier": {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "plugins": [
            {
                "name": "vulnerabilityreport",
                "artifactTypes": "application/sarif+json",
                "maximumAge": "24h",
                "disallowedSeverity": ["high", "critical"],
                "denylistCVEs": ["CVE-2021-44228"]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

> ## Advanced Scenario

Reviewer 2: Wondering what is the enterprise level common requirement, should we encourage customer to sign their report. Maybe we should rename to "vulnerability report with signature validation" instead of "Advanced Scenario."

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://deislabs.github.io/ratify/library/vulnerability-report-validation/template.yaml

kubectl apply -f https://deislabs.github.io/ratify/library/vulnerability-report-validation/samples/constraint.yaml
```

An image `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2` is scanned and a vulnerability report is generated. A reference artifact is generated:
1. Use Trivy to scan `myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2` and output a report in SARIF format
    ```shell
    trivy image -q -f sarif myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 > trivy-sarif.json
    ```
2. A tool such as `oras` is used to package, attach, and then push the report to registry
    - `artifact-type` MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - file media type (layer) MUST be `application/sarif+json`
    - `org.opencontainers.image.created` annotation with RFC3339 formatted current timestamp
    ```shell
    oras attach \
        --artifact-type application/sarif+json \
        --annotation "org.opencontainers.image.created=$(date -u +'%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ')" \
        myregistry.io/vuln/alpine:3.18.2 \
        trivy-sarif.json:application/sarif+json
    ```

> 3. Use `notation` to sign the report

Reviewer 2: should we make notation a link? jsut in case customer is not familiar with the tool, we can also add link for docs on how to generate key etc

| --------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| maximumAge            | No       | spec.parameters.maximumAge            | The string formatted max age of report                                                                                                                            | ""                                 |
| disallowedSeverities  | No       | spec.parameters.disallowedSeverities  | String array of disallowed severities. Verification fails if ANY specified severity found. Most common severities: `low`, `medium`, `high`, `critical`, `unknown` | []                                 |
| denylistCVEs          | No       | spec.parameters.denylistCVEs          | String array of CVE IDs. Verification fails if ANY specified CVE ID found. Find CVEs [here](https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search)                                     | []                                 |

> | passthrough           | No       | spec.parameters.passthrough           | Bypasses all verification except for `maximumAge`. Report content in `report` field of verifier report                                                            | false                              |

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to mention which scenarios may passthrough be useful.
